YDB CLI 2.20.0 release notes (#15287)
ydb-platform/ydb: ydb/docs/en/core/changelog-cli.md

# {{ ydb-short-name }} CLI changelog

## Version 2.20.0 {#2-20-0}

Released on March 5, 2025. To update to version **2.20.0**, select the [Downloads](downloads/index.md#ydb-cli) section.

### Features

* Added [topics](./concepts/topic.md) support in `{{ ydb-cli }} tools dump` and `{{ ydb-cli }} tools restore` [commands](./reference/ydb-cli/export-import/tools-dump.md). In this release, only the settings of the topics are retained; messages are not included in the backup.
* Added [coordination nodes](./concepts/datamodel/coordination-node.md)  support in `{{ ydb-cli }} tools dump` and `{{ ydb-cli }} tools restore` [commands](./reference/ydb-cli/export-import/tools-dump.md).
* Added `{{ ydb-cli }} workload log import generator` command.
* Added new global options for client certificates in SSL/TLS connections:
  * `--client-cert-file`: File containing client certificate for SSL/TLS connections (PKCS#12 or PEM-encoded).
  * `--client-cert-key-file`: File containing PEM encoded client certificate private key for SSL/TLS connections.
  * `--client-cert-key-password-file`: File containing password for client certificate private key (if key is encrypted).

> * Queries in `{{ ydb-cli }} workload run` command are now executed in random order.

Reviewer: Еще как вариант:

Changed the order, in which the `{{ ydb-cli }} workload run` command executes queries, to random.

* **_(Requires server v25.1+)_** Added support for [external data sources](./concepts/datamodel/external_data_source.md) and [external tables](./concepts/datamodel/external_table.md) in the `{{ ydb-cli }} tools dump` and `{{ ydb-cli }} tools restore` [commands](./reference/ydb-cli/export-import/tools-dump.md).
* **_(Experimental)_** Added the `{{ ydb-cli }} admin node config init` command to initialize a directory with node configuration files.

> * **_(Requires server v25.1+)_** **_(Experimental)_** Added the [command](./reference/ydb-cli/export-import/tools-dump#cluster) `{{ ydb-cli }} admin cluster dump` and the [command](./reference/ydb-cli/export-import/tools-restore#cluster) `{{ ydb-cli }} admin cluster restore` for dumping all cluster-level data. These dumps contain a list of databases with metadata, users, and groups but do not include schema objects.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* **_(Requires server v25.1+)_** **_(Experimental)_** Added the [command](./reference/ydb-cli/export-import/tools-dump.md#cluster) `{{ ydb-cli }} admin cluster dump` and the [command](./reference/ydb-cli/export-import/tools-restore.md#cluster) `{{ ydb-cli }} admin cluster restore` for dumping all cluster-level data. These dumps contain a list of databases with metadata, users, and groups but do not include schema objects.
```

* **_(Requires server v25.1+)_** **_(Experimental)_** Added `{{ ydb-cli }} admin cluster dump` and `{{ ydb-cli }} admin cluster restore` commands for dumping all cluster-level data. Such dumps contain database list with metadata, users and groups, but does not contain scheme objects.
* **_(Requires server v25.1+)_** **_(Experimental)_** Added `{{ ydb-cli }} admin database dump` and `{{ ydb-cli }} admin database restore` commands for dumping all database-level data. Such dumps contain database metadata, scheme objects, their data, users and groups.

### Bug fixes

* Fixed a bug where `{{ ydb-cli }} auth get-token` command tried to authenticate twice: while listing endpoints and while executing the actual token request.
* Fixed a bug where `{{ ydb-cli }} import file csv` command was saving progress even if a batch upload had been failed.

> * Fixed a bug where some errors could be ignored when restoring from a local backup.

Author: Имеется в виду обычный бэкап (директории/таблицы).  Напишу "при восстановлении из бэкапа командой `ydb tools restore`"

* Added new `{{ ydb-cli }} workload log import generator` command.
* Added new global options for client certificates in SSL/TLS connections:
  * `--client-cert-file`: File containing a client certificate for SSL/TLS connections (PKCS#12 or PEM-encoded).
  * `--client-cert-key-file`: File containing a PEM-encoded private key to the client certificate for SSL/TLS connections.
  * `--client-cert-key-password-file`: File containing a password for the private key (if the key is encrypted).
* Queries in the `{{ ydb-cli }} workload run` command are now executed in random order.
* **_(Requires server v25.1+)_** Added [external data sources](./concepts/datamodel/external_data_source.md) and [external tables](./concepts/datamodel/external_table.md) support in the `{{ ydb-cli }} tools dump` and `{{ ydb-cli }} tools restore` [commands](./reference/ydb-cli/export-import/tools-dump.md).
* **_(Experimental)_** Added the `{{ ydb-cli }} admin node config init` command to initialize a directory with the node configuration files.

> * **_(Requires server v25.1+)_** **_(Experimental)_** Added the `{{ ydb-cli }} admin cluster config generate` command to generate a dynamic configuration file from a cluster static configuration file.

Reviewer 2: Afaik, this is not documented yet

Reviewer 3: Здесь еще много работы в рамках https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15848, убираем этот пункт из релиз ноутс.

Reviewer: Можно сослаться на https://ydb.tech/docs/ru/reference/ydb-cli/configs.
Как только дока будет готова, ссылку поменяем.

> * **_(Requires server v25.1+)_** **_(Experimental)_** Added the `{{ ydb-cli }} admin cluster dump` and `{{ ydb-cli }} admin cluster restore` commands for dumping all cluster-level data. Such dumps contain a list of databases with metadata, users and groups, but do not contain scheme objects.

Reviewer 2: It seems like this is blocked by https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb/pull/15183

Reviewer 3: Поправила

> Released on March 5, 2025. To update to version **2.20.0**, select the [Downloads](downloads/index.md#ydb-cli) section.
> 
> ### Features
> 
> * Added [topics](./concepts/topic.md) support in the `{{ ydb-cli }} tools dump` and `{{ ydb-cli }} tools restore` [commands](./reference/ydb-cli/export-import/tools-dump.md). In this release, only topic settings are retained; messages are not included in the backup.
> * Added [coordination nodes](./concepts/datamodel/coordination-node.md)  support in the `{{ ydb-cli }} tools dump` and `{{ ydb-cli }} tools restore` [commands](./reference/ydb-cli/export-import/tools-dump.md).
> * Added new `{{ ydb-cli }} workload log import generator` command.
> * Added new global options for client certificates in SSL/TLS connections:
>   * `--client-cert-file`: File containing a client certificate for SSL/TLS connections (PKCS#12 or PEM-encoded).
>   * `--client-cert-key-file`: File containing a PEM-encoded private key to the client certificate for SSL/TLS connections.
>   * `--client-cert-key-password-file`: File containing a password for the private key (if the key is encrypted).
> * Queries in the `{{ ydb-cli }} workload run` command are now executed in random order.
> * **_(Requires server v25.1+)_** Added [external data sources](./concepts/datamodel/external_data_source.md) and [external tables](./concepts/datamodel/external_table.md) support in the `{{ ydb-cli }} tools dump` and `{{ ydb-cli }} tools restore` [commands](./reference/ydb-cli/export-import/tools-dump.md).
> * **_(Experimental)_** Added the `{{ ydb-cli }} admin node config init` command to initialize a directory with the node configuration files.
> * **_(Requires server v25.1+)_** **_(Experimental)_** Added the `{{ ydb-cli }} admin cluster config generate` command to generate a dynamic configuration file from a cluster static configuration file.
> * **_(Requires server v25.1+)_** **_(Experimental)_** Added the `{{ ydb-cli }} admin cluster dump` and `{{ ydb-cli }} admin cluster restore` commands for dumping all cluster-level data. Such dumps contain a list of databases with metadata, users and groups, but do not contain scheme objects.
> * **_(Requires server v25.1+)_** **_(Experimental)_** Added the `{{ ydb-cli }} admin database dump` and `{{ ydb-cli }} admin database restore` commands for dumping all database-level data. Such dumps contain database metadata, scheme objects, their data, users and groups.
> * **_(Requires server v25.1+)_** **_(Experimental)_** Added new options `--dedicated-storage-section` and `--dedicated-cluster-section` to the `ydb admin cluster config fetch` command, allowing to fetch cluster and storage config sections separately.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Released on March 5, 2025. To update to version **2.20.0**, select the [Downloads](downloads/index.md#ydb-cli) section.

### Features

* Added [topics](./concepts/topic.md) support in the `{{ ydb-cli }} tools dump` and `{{ ydb-cli }} tools restore` [commands](./reference/ydb-cli/export-import/tools-dump.md). In this release, only topic settings are retained; messages are not included in the backup.
* Added [coordination nodes](./concepts/datamodel/coordination-node.md) support in the `{{ ydb-cli }} tools dump` and `{{ ydb-cli }} tools restore` [commands](./reference/ydb-cli/export-import/tools-dump.md).
* Added the new `{{ ydb-cli }} workload log import generator` command.
* Added new global options for client certificates in SSL/TLS connections:
  * `--client-cert-file`: File containing a client certificate for SSL/TLS connections (PKCS#12 or PEM-encoded).
  * `--client-cert-key-file`: File containing a PEM-encoded private key for the client certificate.
  * `--client-cert-key-password-file`: File containing a password for the private key (if the key is encrypted).
* Queries in the `{{ ydb-cli }} workload run` command are now executed in random order.
* **_(Requires server v25.1+)_** Added support for [external data sources](./concepts/datamodel/external_data_source.md) and [external tables](./concepts/datamodel/external_table.md) in the `{{ ydb-cli }} tools dump` and `{{ ydb-cli }} tools restore` [commands](./reference/ydb-cli/export-import/tools-dump.md).
* **_(Experimental)_** Added the `{{ ydb-cli }} admin node config init` command to initialize a directory with node configuration files.
* **_(Requires server v25.1+)_** **_(Experimental)_** Added the `{{ ydb-cli }} admin cluster config generate` command to generate a dynamic configuration file from a cluster static configuration file.
* **_(Requires server v25.1+)_** **_(Experimental)_** Added the `{{ ydb-cli }} admin cluster dump` and `{{ ydb-cli }} admin cluster restore` commands for dumping all cluster-level data. These dumps contain a list of databases with metadata, users, and groups but do not include schema objects.
* **_(Requires server v25.1+)_** **_(Experimental)_** Added the `{{ ydb-cli }} admin database dump` and `{{ ydb-cli }} admin database restore` commands for dumping all database-level data. These dumps contain database metadata, schema objects, their data, users, and groups.
* **_(Requires server v25.1+)_** **_(Experimental)_** Added the `--dedicated-storage-section` and `--dedicated-cluster-section` options to the `ydb admin cluster config fetch` command, allowing cluster and storage config sections to be fetched separately.
```

> ### Bug fixes
> 
> * Fixed a bug where the `{{ ydb-cli }} auth get-token` command tried to authenticate twice: while listing endpoints and while executing the actual token request.
> * Fixed a bug where the `{{ ydb-cli }} import file csv` command was saving progress even if a batch upload had failed.
> * Fixed a bug where some errors could be ignored when restoring from a local backup with the `ydb tools restore` command.
> * Fixed a memory leak in the data generator for `{{ ydb-cli }} workload tpcds` benchmark.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Bug fixes

* Fixed a bug where the `{{ ydb-cli }} auth get-token` command attempted to authenticate twice: once while listing endpoints and again while executing the actual token request.
* Fixed a bug where the `{{ ydb-cli }} import file csv` command saved progress even if a batch upload had failed.
* Fixed a bug where some errors could be ignored when restoring from a local backup with the `ydb tools restore` command.
* Fixed a memory leak in the data generator for the `{{ ydb-cli }} workload tpcds` benchmark.
```

Author: С saved вместо was saving не согласен, по смыслу меньше подходит
